<chapter id="details.investments">
<chapterinfo>
<authorgroup>
<author>
<firstname>Ace</firstname>
<surname>Jones</surname>
<affiliation><address><email>acejones@users.sourceforge.net</email></address></affiliation>
</author>
</authorgroup>
<date>2005-06-10</date>
<releaseinfo>0.7</releaseinfo>
</chapterinfo>

<title>Investments - Under development - THB/Ace</title>

<sect1 id="details.investments.overview">

            <title>Investments in &kappname;</title>

<sect2><title>Investments</title>
<para>
Investments are instruments for investing money that are traded on a market.
Stocks, bonds, and mutual funds are the most common investments, so they're the ones supported most directly.
Futures, commodities, options and more complex derivatives are also sometimes used, but &kappname; has no special functionality for them.  As long as they behave like a stock or a bond, they can be tracked easily.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Base Currency</title>
<para>
Each investment has a Base Currency.
This is the currency it's traded in.
When a price quote is entered for an investment, the currency of the value given is always its base currency.
A stock on the NYSE would be in US dollars, and one on the Australian markets would be in Australian dollars.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Investment Accounts</title>
<para>
Investment Accounts hold a collection of investments.  
Transactions, such as buys and sells, of those investments are contained in an Investment Account.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Brokerage Accounts</title>
<para>
Often an investment account has an associated Brokerage Account.
This is also sometimes referred to as a &quot;Cash Account&quot;.
Investment accounts cannot contain cash transactions, like a transfer from your bank.
When a stock is sold, the proceeds are typically placed in the Brokerage Account.
</para>

<para>
When you create an Investment Account, you have the option of creating an associated Brokerage Account with it.
</para>

</sect2>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.investments.investment">

            <title>Creating an Investment Account</title>

<para>
  The first step on the path to working with investments is to create an account to hold your investments.
  Choose   
<menuchoice>
<guimenu>Account</guimenu>
<guimenuitem>Add new account...</guimenuitem>
</menuchoice>
 to begin the process of adding a new account.  Create an account as usual, making sure to choose &quot;Investment&quot; as the type of account.
</para>
<para>
  To work with the new investment account, navigate to the <guibutton>Investments</guibutton> view, 
  and choose the account you just created from the <guilabel>Select Account</guilabel> drop-down box.
</para>
</sect1>
            
<sect1 id="details.investments.securities">

            <title>Adding Investments to Your Account</title>
<para>
  To add individual Investments to your Investment Account, navigate to the <guibutton>Investments</guibutton> view, 
  and choose the account where the investment is held from the <guilabel>Select Account</guilabel> drop-down box.
  Ensure you are looking at the <guibutton>Investment Summary</guibutton> tab.
</para>
<para>
  Right-click the mouse in the empty space in the view.  
  This brings up the <guimenu>Investment Options</guimenu> context menu.  
  Choose <guimenuitem>New...</guimenuitem> from this menu.
  This launches the <guilabel>New Investment Wizard</guilabel> which you use to create your new Investment.
</para>
<para>
  If you are using Online Quotes, ensure that the symbol exactly matches the symbol used by your quote source.
  Yahoo covers most of the world's markets, and requires a suffix on the end of symbols outside the US.
  For example, Rubicon Limited on the New Zealand market should be entered as &quot;RBC.NZ&quot;.  
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.investments.summary">

            <title>Investment Summary Information</title>

<para>
  The Investment Summary tab lists your current holdings in this account, along with their price and value.
</para>
<para>
  It's also the place to add, edit or delete indivdual investments from this account.
  Likewise, you can update the price of your investments here either manually or via their online source.
  To perform any of these, right-click the mouse on any of the investments to bring up the <guimenu>Investment Options</guimenu> context menu.
</para>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.investments.ledger"><title>Investment Ledger</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect1>
<sect1 id="details.investments.foreign"><title>Working With Foreign Investments</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect1>
<sect1 id="details.investments.prices"><title>Updating Prices</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect1>

<sect1 id="details.investments.onlinequotes">

						<title>Online Price Quotes</title>

<sect2><title>How Online Quotes Work</title>
<para>
	KMyMoney has the ability to download the latest prices for your investments and currencies via the web.
	At your request, it will fetch a page from the web that contains the latest price for each item.
	By default, prices are fetched from finance.yahoo.com, and are subject to the terms and conditions of that site.
</para>
<para>
	The online quote lookup uses the investment's trading symbol to find the price.  
	Therefore, it's important to set the symbol correctly.
	Yahoo supports stocks from most major world markets, so it's usually just a matter of finding the correct symbol.
	For example, TietoEnator trades on the Stockholm Stock Exchange market, and its Yahoo symbol is TIEN.ST.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Assigning a Quote Source</title>

<para>
	In order to get online price quotes, you first have to enable it for each investment or currency you want updated by setting a &quot;Online Quote Source&quot;.
	This is the name of the service from which the quote should be fetched.  KMyMoney ships with several sources to choose from.  
	Yahoo is the recommended default source, and should work for most investments and all currencies.
</para>
<para>
	To assign a quote source to an investment, navigate to the investment summary view for the account in which the security is held.
	Edit the security by right-clicking it and selecting &quot;Edit&quot;.  
	Choose the &quot;Quote Source&quot; tab.  
	Pick the appropriate source from the drop-down menu.
</para>
<para>
	To assign a quote source to a currency price, choose the price editor from the Tools menu.  
	Select a currency pair, and edit it.
	Choose the &quot;Quote Source&quot; tab.  
	Pick the appropriate source from the drop-down menu.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Fetching Quotes</title>

<para>
	Typically, you will update the prices for all your investments and currencies at once.  
	Choose the Online Price Quote option from the tools menu, and press &quot;Update All&quot;
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Editing or Adding Quote Sources</title>

<para>
	Editing or adding quote sources is not recommended for anyone but the most technical user.  
	You should feel comfortable reading HTML, and writing complex regular expressions.
	If this doesn't sound like you, we recommend writing to the developer's list if none of the quote sources work for you.  
	Ideally, please point us to a web page where these quotes can be obtained.
</para>
<para>
	If you do feel up to the challenge, here's how it works.  
	The quote sources are contained in the settings dialog.  
	Choose &quot;Configure KMyMoney&quot; from the Tools menu.  
	From there, choose the &quot;Online Quotes&quot; section.  
	You can choose an existing source to edit, or create a new one.  
	When you are done with your changes, be sure to press the &quot;Update&quot; button before exiting the dialog.
	Your changes are not saved by default.
</para>
<para>
	The first thing to worry about in an online quote source is the URL.  
	This is the page that is fetched from the web.  
	You will see a %1 in all sources, and a %2 in currency sources.  For investments, %1 is replaced by the trading symbol.
	For currencies, %1 is replaced by the From currency, and %2 is replaced by the To.  
	This URL is then fetched, all HTML tags are removed, and that stripped file is then sent to the page parser.
</para>
<para>
	Note that the URL can also be a file: URL, which the quote fetcher takes to mean an executable script.  
	It will pass any command-line arguments to it that you have specified, and feed the stdout to the page parser.
	For example, you might have a script called getquote.sh that contained custom quote logic, taking the symbol as a single paramenter.
	Your URL would be &quot;file:/path/to/getquote.sh %1&quot;.
</para>
<para>
	The page parser looks for a symbol, a date, and a price.  
	Regular expressions tell it how to rip those items out of the page.  
	Please review the documentation for the QRegExp class at doc.trolltech.com for the exact makeup of the regular expressions.
	There should be exactly one capture expression, surrounded by parentheses, in each regexp.
	The date format further tells the date parser the order of year, month, and day.  
	This date format should always be in the form "%x %x %x". where x is y, m, or d.
	The date parser is very smart.  &quot;%m %d %y&quot; will parse &quot;December 31st, 2005&quot; as easily as &quot;12/31/05&quot;.  
	Two digit years are interpreted as being in the range of 1950-2049.
</para>
</sect2>
</sect1>
</chapter>

