<chapter id="details.reports">
<title>Reports (NEW)</title>

<sect1 id="details.reports.avail">
						<title>Available Reports</title>

<sect2><title>Income and Expenses</title>

<para>
	The reports in this sect2 show your income and expenses either for the current month, or for each month in the current year.
	Of course, the duration of the overall report and the duration captured by each column can be configured to your liking.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Net Worth</title>

<para>
	Here there are reports that describe your net worth, either at the current moment, or every month for the current year, or every year of your history.
	There are also reports to get the balances for all of your accounts at any given point in time.
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Transactions</title>

<para>
	This sect2 includes reports that list out your individual transactions.  
	This is the best way to print your account register for a specific period of time.
</para>
<para>
	They can be grouped together according to your liking by choosing the appropriate report:
</para>

	<itemizedlist>
	<listitem><para>By Account</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>By Category</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>By Month or Week</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>By Payee</para></listitem>
	</itemizedlist>

</sect2>

<sect2><title>Investments</title>

<para>
	These reports help you keep track of your investments.
	They only include investment accounts.
</para>
<itemizedlist>
      	<listitem><para>Investment Transactions.  Similiar to a Transactions report, and including the share price and quantities.</para></listitem>
      	<listitem><para>Investment Holdings by Account.  Shows the current shares, price, and value for each account.</para></listitem>
      	<listitem><para>Investment Holdings by Type.  Same as the previous report, but organizes the accounts by type (Stock, Mutual Fund, etc)</para></listitem>
      	<listitem><para>Investment Performance by Account.  Shows the annualized performance over any period of time.  
      		This performs a cash flow analysis of all money coming into and going out of the account.
      		As a result, this is a very accurate picture of how well your investments are doing.</para></listitem>
      	<listitem><para>Investment Performance by Type.  Same as the previous report, but organizes the accounts by type (Stock, Mutual Fund, etc)</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
	
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Taxes</title>

<para>
	The tax reports are just like the Transactions report, with the addition that only Tax categories are included.  
	This allows you to flag certain categories as being tax-related, and then get one big report at the end of the year to see them all in one place
</para>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Favorites</title>

<para>
	This section lists all the reports you have marked as your favorite in the configuration dialog.  
	They are still listed in one of the other sect2s, but they're also aggregated here for your easy reference.
	Favorite reports are also included on the financial summary page for even easier reference.
</para>
</sect2>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.reports.working">
					<title>Working With Reports</title>

<para>
	There are a number of actions you can take on each report.  
	You can access these by right-clicking the report name in the list of reports.  
	Alternately, once you have run a report, there are buttons across the top of the view to invoke each of these:
</para>

	<itemizedlist>
	<listitem><para>Save:  Reports can be saved in HTML or CSV format.</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>Copy:  They can be copied to the clipboard to paste them in another application, like a spreadsheet, for further analysis.</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>Print:  You can print them to your favorite printer.</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>Delete:  Customized reports can be deleted.  The default reports that ship with KMyMoney cannot be deleted.</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>New:  Create a new customized report based on the selected report.</para></listitem>
	<listitem><para>Customize:  Change the properties of this report.</para></listitem>
	</itemizedlist>
</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.reports.config">

					<title>Configuring Reports</title>

<sect2><title>Working with custom reports</title>

<para>
	Any of the default reports which ship with the program can be customized to your liking.
	This can be done with an easy-to-use dialog--no special programming knowledge is required.
	Customizing allows you to select a subset of accounts, for example, or change the date period of the report, or choose only a single payee, etc.
	The possibilities are nearly endless.
	When you customize a default report, it creates a new report.  
	Initially it is named the same as the old report with &quot;Custom&quot; added to the end.
	You can change the name to whatever you want.  
	You can even name your custom reports the same as a default report, or the same as another custom report.
	There are no limits in this area.  
	You can always use the Comment field to further distinguish reports.
</para>
</sect2>


<sect2><title>Report Tab</title><para>On this tab, you set the basic properties of this report.</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Report Name: Choose a name for this report.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Comment: Enter a comment to help you remember the details of this report.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Convert values to base currency: Select this option to convert all values in the report to your base currency.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;p&gt;Leave it unchecked if you'd like to see values in their original currency. If currencies are not converted, then subtotals will not be shown.</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Mark as a favorite report: Select this option to notate this report as one of your favorites.&lt;/p&gt;&lt;p&gt;All your favorite reports are grouped in one place on the report list for easy access.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>
</sect2>

<sect2><title>Rows/Columns Tab</title><para>On this tab, you configure how you'd like the rows and columns to be selected and organized.</para>

<para>For income/expense and net worth reports:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Columns: Choose how large of a time period each column should encompass</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Rows: Choose what kind of accounts to display as the rows of this report</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Show Top Categories Only: Select this option to summarize all sub-categories into a single line for each Top Category</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

<para>For transaction reports:</para>
<itemizedlist>
<listitem><para>Organize by: Choose how to group the transactions in this report</para></listitem>
<listitem><para>Show Columns: Choose which columns should be shown in the report. The date and transaction amount are always shown.</para></listitem>
</itemizedlist>

</sect2>

<!-- I need the find transaction dialog decl.ui to see all these tabs -->

<sect2><title>Accounts Tab</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect2>
<sect2><title>Categories Tab</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect2>
<sect2><title>Payees Tab</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect2>
<sect2><title>Text Tab</title><para>&hellip;</para></sect2>

</sect1>

<sect1 id="details.reports.charts">
					<title>Graphs &amp; Charts</title>

<para>
	Graphs and charts are not supported in this release.  
	They are planned for a future release.
</para>
</sect1>
</chapter>
