<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<chapter id="details.budgets">
  <chapterinfo>
    <authorgroup>
      <author>
        <surname>Colin Wright &lt;cdwright@gwi.net&gt;</surname>
      </author>
    </authorgroup>

    <date>2008-01-20</date>

    <releaseinfo>0.9</releaseinfo>
  </chapterinfo>

  <title id="details.budgets.title">Budgets</title>

  <sect1 id="details.budgets.create">
    <title>What is a budget</title>

    <para>A budget is a categorized list of expected income and expenditure
    for a period.</para>

    <para>The Budget facility of &kappname; allows you to create annual budgets.
    More than one Budget can be created for any year. You set monthly Budget
    values against any Income or Expense categories that you have defined. The
    values can be set in three ways, depending on the Period:</para>

    <variablelist>
      <varlistentry>
        <term>Monthly</term>

        <listitem>
          <para>(Default) specify a single value applied to every month in the
          Budget</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term>Yearly</term>

        <listitem>
          <para>specify a single value to divide evenly across each month in
          the Budget</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>

      <varlistentry>
        <term>Individual</term>

        <listitem>
          <para>specify separate values for each month.</para>
        </listitem>
      </varlistentry>
    </variablelist>

    <para>This is used for income and expenses spread irregularly through the
    year. &kappname; provides a number of reports which compare actual income
    and expenses against the entered Budgets.</para>

    <sect2>
      <title>Your budgets</title>

      <para>You can access your budgets by clicking the appropriate large icon
      in the navigation pane at the left hand side of your &kappname;
      window.</para>

      <sect3>
        <title>Creating, changing and deleting budgets</title>

        <para>This section of the Budgets window displays the list of Budgets
        contained in the current file. If no Budget has yet been created the
        list will display a single empty Budget called "Budget &lt;year&gt;"
        where &lt;year&gt; is the current fiscal year. The list of Budgets has
        two columns:</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Name</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Name of the Budget</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Year</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Fiscal year of the Budget</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>

        <para>Values from the selected Budget are displayed to the right. To
        select a different Budget you can click on the Budget in the list.
        Alternatively, when the list has focus you can select a different
        Budget using the up and down keys. If you have made changes to a
        Budget and then select a different budget &kappname; will ask you
        whether you want to discard the changes.</para>

        <para>There are two buttons above the list of Budgets.</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Edit</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Edit the name of the selected Budget You can also edit the
              name of a Budget by clicking on the name of the selected Budget
              or double-clicking on the name of a different Budget.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Delete</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Delete the selected Budget</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>

        <para>There is a button below the list of Budgets</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>New</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Create a new budget</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>

        <para>Additional options are available on a menu accessed by
        right-clicking on a Budget.</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>New Budget</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Create a new, blank Budget.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Rename Budget</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Rename the selected Budget.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Change budget year</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Displays a window with a list of years to select a
              different budget year.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Delete budget</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Delete the selected Budget.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Copy budget</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Creates a copy of the selected Budget. The new Budget has
              the name "Copy of &lt;budget&gt;", where &lt;budget&gt; is the
              name of the copied Budget.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3>
        <title>Account List</title>

        <para>The Account List displays the list of Income and Expense
        Categories. As in other places in &kappname; the list is organized in a
        tree structure. The list can be expanded or collapsed to show or hide
        Subcategories within a Category. The Account List has a number of
        columns:</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Account</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Account name</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Type</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Account Type (Income or Expense)</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Tax</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Checked if a Category included in Tax Reports</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>VAT</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Checked if a Category marked as a VAT Category</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Balance</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Current balance of Account. Blank for Categories</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Value</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Total yearly value in the Budget. If an Account has
              Subaccounts and the Account's list of Subaccounts is collapsed
              the value displayed is the sum of the values for the Account and
              all of its Subaccounts.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>
      </sect3>

      <sect3>
        <title>Assignments</title>

        <para>The Assignments area shows the value for the selected
        Account.</para>

        <variablelist>
          <varlistentry>
            <term>Account</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Displays the name of the selected Account. If the Account
              is a Subaccount, the full name of the selected Account is
              displayed in the Account:Subaccount format.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Total</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>Displays the total yearly value assigned to the
              Account</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Include subaccounts</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>[What does this do????]</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Clear</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>The Clear button resets the budgeted account value to zero
              per month.</para>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>

          <varlistentry>
            <term>Period</term>

            <listitem>
              <para>The Period radio buttons allow you to select the period
              for which the value applies</para>

              <variablelist>
                <varlistentry>
                  <term>Monthly</term>

                  <listitem>
                    <para>A single value is entered, specifying the amount per
                    month. This is the default setting.</para>
                  </listitem>
                </varlistentry>

                <varlistentry>
                  <term>Yearly</term>

                  <listitem>
                    <para>A single value is entered, specifying the amount per
                    year.</para>
                  </listitem>
                </varlistentry>

                <varlistentry>
                  <term>Individual</term>

                  <listitem>
                    <para>Values are specified for each Calendar month. This
                    is used where expense or income is spread irregularly
                    through the year.</para>
                  </listitem>
                </varlistentry>
              </variablelist>
            </listitem>
          </varlistentry>
        </variablelist>

        <para>If a value is or values are already specified and the Period is
        changed &kappname; will ask whether to use the current total yearly
        value to assign the new values.</para>

        <para></para>
      </sect3>

      <sect3>
        <title>Update</title>

        <para>Changes made to a Budget are not saved immediately. When there
        are unsaved changes to a Budget the Update button is enabled. Pressing
        the Update button will save the changes made to the Budget. However,
        the changes are not permanently saved until you use the normal
        &kappname; Save.</para>
      </sect3>
    </sect2>

    <sect2>
      <title>Budget Reports</title>

      <para>&kappname; provides a number of reports to compare actual income and
      expenses against Budgets. These are listed in Reports under "6.
      Budgeting". There are two types of Reports:</para>

      <variablelist>
        <varlistentry>
          <term>(1)</term>

          <listitem>
            <para>Reports displaying values from a Budget: Monthly Budget
            Displays the monthly values from a Budget. Yearly Budget Displays
            the monthly values from a Budget, with yearly total.</para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>

        <varlistentry>
          <term>(2)</term>

          <listitem>
            <para>Reports comparing values from a Budget to actual income and
            expenses: Budget vs. Actual This Year Month-by-month comparison
            for the current year so far, with total. Monthly Budget vs. Actual
            Month-by-month comparison, defaulting to the current month. Yearly
            Budgeted vs. Actual Month-by-month comparison for the whole of the
            current year, with total. These reports provide a base from which
            custom reports can be created by changing the date range and
            Budget. Of the Budget reports, only the "Budget vs. Actual This
            Year" does not allow the Budget to be changed.</para>
          </listitem>
        </varlistentry>
      </variablelist>
    </sect2>
  </sect1>
</chapter>